In computing, a denial-of-service attack (DoS attack  doss) is a cyberattack in which the perpetrator seeks to make a machine or network resource unavailable to its intended users by temporarily or indefinitely disrupting services of a host connected to a network. Denial of service is typically accomplished by flooding the targeted machine or resource with superfluous requests in an attempt to overload systems and prevent some or all legitimate requests from being fulfilled. The range of attacks varies widely, spanning from inundating a server with millions of requests to slow its performance, overwhelming a server with a substantial amount of invalid data, to submitting requests with an illegitimate IP address.
In a distributed denial-of-service attack (DDoS attack  DEE-doss), the incoming traffic flooding the victim originates from many different sources. More sophisticated strategies are required to mitigate this type of attack; simply attempting to block a single source is insufficient.  A DDoS attack is analogous to a group of people crowding the entry door of a shop, making it hard for legitimate customers to enter, thus disrupting trade and losing the business money. Criminal perpetrators of DDoS attacks often target sites or services hosted on high-profile web servers such as banks or credit card payment gateways. Revenge and blackmail, as well as hacktivism, can motivate these attacks.


== History ==
Panix, the third-oldest Internet service provider (ISP) in the world, was the target of what is thought to be the first DoS attack. On September 6, 1996, Panix was subject to a SYN flood attack, which brought down its services for several days while hardware vendors, notably Cisco, figured out a proper defense. The release of sample code during the event led to the online attack of Sprint, EarthLink, E-Trade, and other major corporations in the year to follow.
In February 2020, Amazon Web Services experienced an attack with a peak volume of 2.3 Tb/s. In July 2021, Cloudflare boasted of protecting its client from a DDoS attack from a global Mirai botnet that was up to 17.2 million requests per second. Russian DDoS prevention provider Yandex said it blocked an HTTP pipelining DDoS attack on September 5, 2021 that originated from unpatched Mikrotik networking gear. In the first half of 2022, the Russian invasion of Ukraine significantly shaped the cyberthreat landscape, with an increase in cyberattacks attributed to both state-sponsored actors and global hacktivist activities. The most notable event was a DDoS attack in February, the largest Ukraine has encountered, disrupting government and financial sector services. This wave of cyber aggression extended to Western allies like the UK, the US, and Germany. Particularly, the UK's financial sector saw an increase in DDoS attacks from nation-state actors and hacktivists, aimed at undermining Ukraine's allies.
In February 2023, Cloudflare faced a 71 million requests per second attack which they claimed was the largest HTTP DDoS attack at the time. HTTP DDoS attacks are measured by HTTP requests per second instead of packets per second or bits per second. On July 10, 2023, the fanfiction platform Archive of Our Own (AO3) faced DDoS attacks, disrupting services. Anonymous Sudan, claiming the attack for religious and political reasons, was viewed skeptically by AO3 and experts. Flashpoint, a threat intelligence vendor, noted the group's past activities but doubted their stated motives. AO3, supported by the non-profit Organization for Transformative Works (OTW) and reliant on donations, is unlikely to meet the $30,000 Bitcoin ransom.
In August 2023, the group of hacktivists NoName057 targeted several Italian financial institutions, through the execution of slow DoS attacks. On 14 January 2024, they executed a DDoS attack on Swiss federal websites, prompted by President Zelensky's attendance at the Davos World Economic Forum. Switzerland's National Cyber Security Centre quickly mitigated the attack, ensuring core federal services remained secure, despite temporary accessibility issues on some websites. In October 2023, exploitation of a new vulnerability in the HTTP/2 protocol resulted in the record for largest HTTP DDoS attack being broken twice, once with a 201 million requests per second attack observed by Cloudflare, and again with a 398 million requests per second attack observed by Google. In August 2024, Global Secure Layer observed and reported on a record-breaking packet DDoS at 3.15 billion packets per second, which targeted an undisclosed number of unofficial Minecraft game servers.
In October 2024, the Internet Archive faced two severe DDoS attacks that brought the site completely offline, immediately following a previous attack that leaked records of over 31 million of the site's users. The hacktivist group SN_Blackmeta claimed the DDoS attack as retribution for American involvement in the Gaza war, despite the Internet Archive being unaffiliated with the United States government; however, their link with the preceding data leak remains unclear.
Cloudflare claims to have recorded and successfully autonomously blocked a 40-second DDoS attack on 23 September 2025, that reached a peak volume of 22.2 Tbit/s, which would be the largest DDoS attack to date. Cloudflare has stated that over 404,000 source IPs were used to target one IP address, and that the source IPs were not spoofed. According to Cloudflare, this came after several other large-scale DDoS attacks, each consecutively beating the previous record, including a 7.3 Tbit/s attack in May 2025 and an 11.5 Tbit/s attack on 1 September 2025.


== Types ==
Denial-of-service attacks are characterized by an explicit attempt by attackers to prevent legitimate use of a service. There are two general forms of DoS attacks: those that crash services and those that flood services. The most serious attacks are distributed.


=== Distributed DoS ===
A distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack occurs when multiple systems flood the bandwidth or resources of a targeted system, usually one or more web servers. A DDoS attack uses more than one unique IP address or machine, often from thousands of hosts infected with malware. A distributed denial of service attack typically involves more than around 3–5 nodes on different networks; fewer nodes may qualify as a DoS attack but is not a DDoS attack.
Most of the time, attackers operate from an endpoint that is not their intended target, for example using another user's machine to attack a server. By using another unsuspecting endpoint, if it becomes compromised, they can then move onto another workstation within the enterprise network. However, even faking lots of users and executing a DoS attack, a single attacker with few computers is still very limited in the amount of traffic they can generate. If the attacks are from multiple sources, it can be difficult for the host to identify and stop them.
The scale of DDoS attacks has continued to rise over recent years, by 2016 exceeding a terabit per second. Some common examples of DDoS attacks are UDP flooding, SYN flooding and DNS amplification.


==== Yo-yo attack ====
A yo-yo attack is a specific type of DoS/DDoS aimed at cloud-hosted applications which use autoscaling. During the attack, an attacker repeatedly changes between sending a lot of traffic (which causes a scale-up) and stopping the burst (causing a scale-down as a result).


=== Application layer attacks ===
An application layer DDoS attack (sometimes referred to as layer 7 DDoS attack) is a form of DDoS attack where attackers target application-layer processes. The attack over-exercises specific functions or features of a website with the intention to disable those functions or features. This application-layer attack is different from an entire network attack, and is often used against financial institutions to distract IT and security personnel from security breaches. In 2013, application-layer DDoS attacks represented 20% of all DDoS attacks. According to research by Akamai Technologies, there have been "51 percent more application layer attacks" from Q4 2013 to Q4 2014 and "16 percent more" from Q3 2014 to Q4 2014. In November 2017; Junade Ali, an engineer at Cloudflare noted that whilst network-level attacks continue to be of high capacity, they were occurring less frequently. Ali further noted that although network-level attacks were becoming less frequent, data from Cloudflare demonstrated that application-layer attacks were still showing no sign of slowing down.


==== Method of attack ====
The simplest DoS attack relies primarily on brute force, flooding the target with an overwhelming flux of packets, oversaturating its connection bandwidth or depleting the target's system resources. Bandwidth-saturating floods rely on the attacker's ability to generate the overwhelming flux of packets. A common way of achieving this today is via distributed denial-of-service, employing a botnet. An application layer DDoS attack is done mainly for specific targeted purposes, including disrupting transactions and access to databases. It requires fewer resources than network layer attacks but often accompanies them. An attack may be disguised to look like legitimate traffic, except it targets specific application packets or functions. The attack on the application layer can disrupt services such as the retrieval of information or search functions on a website.


=== Advanced persistent DoS ===
An advanced persistent DoS (APDoS) is associated with an advanced persistent threat and requires specialized DDoS mitigation. These attacks can persist for weeks; the longest continuous period noted so far lasted 38 days. This attack involved approximately 50+ petabits (50,000+ terabits) of malicious traffic. Attackers in this scenario may tactically switch between several targets to create a diversion to evade defensive DDoS countermeasures but all the while eventually concentrating the main thrust of the attack onto a single victim. In this scenario, attackers with continuous access to several very powerful network resources are capable of sustaining a prolonged campaign generating enormous levels of unamplified DDoS traffic. APDoS attacks are characterized by:

advanced reconnaissance (pre-attack OSINT and extensive decoyed scanning crafted to evade detection over long periods)
tactical execution (attack with both primary and secondary victims but the focus is on primary)
explicit motivation (a calculated end game/goal target)
large computing capacity (access to substantial computer power and network bandwidth)
simultaneous multi-threaded OSI layer attacks (sophisticated tools operating at layers 3 through 7)
persistence over extended periods (combining all the above into a concerted, well-managed attack across a range of targets).


=== Denial-of-service as a service ===

Some vendors provide so-called booter or stresser services, which have simple web-based front ends, and accept payment over the web. Marketed and promoted as stress-testing tools, they can be used to perform unauthorized denial-of-service attacks, and allow technically unsophisticated attackers access to sophisticated attack tools. Usually powered by a botnet, the traffic produced by a consumer stresser can range anywhere from 5-50 Gbit/s, which can, in most cases, deny the average home user internet access.


=== Markov-modulated denial-of-service attack ===
A Markov-modulated denial-of-service attack occurs when the attacker disrupts control packets using a hidden Markov model. A setting in which Markov-model-based attacks are prevalent is online gaming as the disruption of the control packet undermines gameplay and system functionality.


== Symptoms ==
The United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) has identified symptoms of a denial-of-service attack to include:

unusually slow network performance (opening files or accessing websites),
unavailability of a particular website, or
inability to access any website.


== Attack techniques ==


=== Attack tools ===
In cases such as MyDoom and Slowloris, the tools are embedded in malware and launch their attacks without the knowledge of the system owner. Stacheldraht is a classic example of a DDoS tool. It uses a layered structure where the attacker uses a client program to connect to handlers which are compromised systems that issue commands to the zombie agents which in turn facilitate the DDoS attack. Agents are compromised via the handlers by the attacker using automated routines to exploit vulnerabilities in programs that accept remote connections running on the targeted remote hosts. Each handler can control up to a thousand agents.
In other cases a machine may become part of a DDoS attack with the owner's consent, for example, in Operation Payback organized by the group Anonymous. The Low Orbit Ion Cannon has typically been used in this way. Along with High Orbit Ion Cannon  a wide variety of DDoS tools are available today, including paid and free versions, with different features available. There is an underground market for these in hacker-related forums and IRC channels.


=== Application-layer attacks ===
Application-layer attacks employ DoS-causing exploits and can cause server-running software to fill the disk space or consume all available memory or CPU time. Attacks may use specific packet types or connection requests to saturate finite resources by, for example, occupying the maximum number of open connections or filling the victim's disk space with logs. An attacker with shell-level access to a victim's computer may slow it until it is unusable or crash it by using a fork bomb. Another kind of application-level DoS attack is XDoS (or XML DoS) which can be controlled by modern web application firewalls (WAFs). All attacks belonging to the category of timeout exploiting.
Slow DoS attacks implement an application-layer attack. Examples of threats are Slowloris, establishing pending connections with the victim, or SlowDroid, an attack running on mobile devices. Another target of DDoS attacks may be to produce added costs for the application operator, when the latter uses resources based on cloud computing. In this case, normally application-used resources are tied to a needed quality of service (QoS) level (e.g. responses should be less than 200 ms) and this rule is usually linked to automated software (e.g. Amazon CloudWatch) to raise more virtual resources from the provider to meet the defined QoS levels for the increased requests. The main incentive behind such attacks may be to drive the application owner to raise the elasticity levels to handle the increased application traffic, to cause financial losses, or force them to become less competitive. A banana attack is another particular type of DoS. It involves redirecting outgoing messages from the client back onto the client, preventing outside access, as well as flooding the client with the sent packets. A LAND attack is of this type.


=== Degradation-of-service attacks ===
Pulsing zombies are compromised computers that are directed to launch intermittent and short-lived flooding of victim websites with the intent of merely slowing it rather than crashing it. This type of attack, referred to as degradation-of-service, can be more difficult to detect and can disrupt and hamper connection to websites for prolonged periods of time, potentially causing more overall disruption than a denial-of-service attack. Exposure of degradation-of-service attacks is complicated further by the matter of discerning whether the server is really being attacked or is experiencing higher than normal legitimate traffic loads.


=== Distributed DoS attack ===
If an attacker mounts an attack from a single host, it would be classified as a DoS attack. Any attack against availability would be classed as a denial-of-service attack. On the other hand, if an attacker uses many systems to simultaneously launch attacks against a remote host, this would be classified as a DDoS attack. Malware can carry DDoS attack mechanisms; one of the better-known examples of this was MyDoom. Its DoS mechanism was triggered on a specific date and time. This type of DDoS involved hardcoding the target IP address before releasing the malware and no further interaction was necessary to launch the attack. A system may also be compromised with a trojan containing a zombie agent. Attackers can also break into systems using automated tools that exploit flaws in programs that listen for connections from remote hosts. This scenario primarily concerns systems acting as servers on the web. Stacheldraht is a classic example of a DDoS tool. It uses a layered structure where the attacker uses a client program to connect to handlers, which are compromised systems that issue commands to the zombie agents, which in turn facilitate the DDoS attack. Agents are compromised via the handlers by the attacker. Each handler can control up to a thousand agents. In some cases a machine may become part of a DDoS attack with the owner's consent, for example, in Operation Payback, organized by the group Anonymous. These attacks can use different types of internet packets such as TCP, UDP, ICMP, etc.
These collections of compromised systems are known as botnets. DDoS tools like Stacheldraht still use classic DoS attack methods centered on IP spoofing and amplification like smurf attacks and fraggle attacks (types of bandwidth consumption attacks). SYN floods (a resource starvation attack) may also be used. Newer tools can use DNS servers for DoS purposes. Unlike MyDoom's DDoS mechanism, botnets can be turned against any IP address. Script kiddies use them to deny the availability of well known websites to legitimate users. More sophisticated attackers use DDoS tools for the purposes of extortion – including against their business rivals. It has been reported that there are new attacks from internet of things (IoT) devices that have been involved in denial of service attacks. One such attack peaked at around 20,000 requests per second; it came from around 900 CCTV cameras. UK's GCHQ has tools built for DDoS, named PREDATORS FACE and ROLLING THUNDER.
Simple attacks such as SYN floods may appear with a wide range of source IP addresses, giving the appearance of a distributed DoS. These flood attacks do not require completion of the TCP three-way handshake and attempt to exhaust the destination SYN queue or the server bandwidth. Because the source IP addresses can be trivially spoofed, an attack could come from a limited set of sources, or may even originate from a single host. Stack enhancements such as SYN cookies may be effective mitigation against SYN queue flooding but do not address bandwidth exhaustion. In 2022, TCP attacks were the leading method in DDoS incidents, accounting for 63% of all DDoS activity. This includes tactics like TCP SYN, TCP ACK, and TCP floods. With TCP being the most widespread networking protocol, its attacks are expected to remain prevalent in the DDoS threat scene.


=== DDoS extortion ===
In 2015, DDoS botnets such as DD4BC grew in prominence, taking aim at financial institutions. Cyber-extortionists typically begin with a low-level attack and a warning that a larger attack will be carried out if a ransom is not paid in bitcoin. Security experts recommend targeted websites to not pay the ransom. The attackers tend to get into an extended extortion scheme once they recognize that the target is ready to pay.


=== HTTP slow POST DoS attack ===
First discovered in 2009, the HTTP slow POST attack sends a complete, legitimate HTTP POST header, which includes a Content-Length field to specify the size of the message body to follow. However, the attacker then proceeds to send the actual message body at an extremely slow rate (e.g. 1 byte/110 seconds). Due to the entire message being correct and complete, the target server will attempt to obey the Content-Length field in the header and wait for the entire body of the message to be transmitted, which can take a very long time. The attacker establishes hundreds or even thousands of such connections until all resources for incoming connections on the victim server are exhausted, making any further connections impossible until all data has been sent. It is notable that unlike many other DoS or DDoS attacks, which try to subdue the server by overloading its network or CPU, an HTTP slow POST attack targets the logical resources of the victim, which means the victim would still have enough network bandwidth and processing power to operate. Combined with the fact that the Apache HTTP Server will, by default, accept requests up to 2GB in size, this attack can be particularly powerful. HTTP slow POST attacks are difficult to differentiate from legitimate connections and are therefore able to bypass some protection systems. OWASP, an open source web application security project, released a tool to test the security of servers against this type of attack.


=== Challenge Collapsar (CC) attack ===
A Challenge Collapsar (CC) attack is an attack where standard HTTP requests are sent to a targeted web server frequently. The Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) in the requests require complicated time-consuming algorithms or database operations which may exhaust the resources of the targeted web server. In 2004, a Chinese hacker nicknamed KiKi invented a hacking tool to send these kinds of requests to attack a NSFOCUS firewall named Collapsar, and thus the hacking tool was known as Challenge Collapsar, or CC for short. Consequently, this type of attack got the name CC attack.


=== Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) flood ===
A smurf attack relies on misconfigured network devices that allow packets to be sent to all computer hosts on a particular network via the broadcast address of the network, rather than a specific machine. The attacker will send large numbers of IP packets with the source address faked to appear to be the address of the victim. Most devices on a network will, by default, respond to this by sending a reply to the source IP address. If the number of machines on the network that receive and respond to these packets is very large, the victim's computer will be flooded with traffic. This overloads the victim's computer and can even make it unusable during such an attack.
Ping flood is based on sending the victim an overwhelming number of ping packets, usually using the ping command from Unix-like hosts. It is very simple to launch, the primary requirement being access to greater bandwidth than the victim. Ping of death is based on sending the victim a malformed ping packet, which will lead to a system crash on a vulnerable system. The BlackNurse attack is an example of an attack taking advantage of the required Destination Port Unreachable ICMP packets.


=== Nuke ===
A nuke is an old-fashioned denial-of-service attack against computer networks consisting of fragmented or otherwise invalid ICMP packets sent to the target, achieved by using a modified ping utility to repeatedly send this corrupt data, thus slowing down the affected computer until it comes to a complete stop. A specific example of a nuke attack that gained some prominence is the WinNuke, which exploited the vulnerability in the NetBIOS handler in Windows 95. A string of out-of-band data was sent to TCP port 139 of the victim's machine, causing it to lock up and display a Blue Screen of Death.


=== Peer-to-peer attacks ===

Attackers have found a way to exploit a number of bugs in peer-to-peer servers to initiate DDoS attacks. The most aggressive of these peer-to-peer-DDoS attacks exploits the DC++ file sharing network. With peer-to-peer attacks there is no botnet and the attacker does not have to communicate with the clients it subverts. Instead, the attacker acts as a puppet master, instructing clients of large peer-to-peer file sharing hubs to disconnect from their peer-to-peer network and to connect to the victim's website instead.


=== Permanent denial-of-service attacks ===
Permanent denial-of-service (PDoS), also known loosely as phlashing, is an attack that damages a system so badly that it requires replacement or reinstallation of hardware. Unlike the distributed denial-of-service attack, a PDoS attack exploits security flaws which allow remote administration on the management interfaces of the victim's hardware, such as routers, printers, or other networking hardware. The attacker uses these vulnerabilities to replace a device's firmware with a modified, corrupt, or defective firmware image—a process which when done legitimately is known as flashing. The intent is to brick the device, rendering it unusable for its original purpose until it can be repaired or replaced. The PDoS is a pure hardware-targeted attack that can be much faster and requires fewer resources than using a botnet in a DDoS attack. Because of these features, and the potential and high probability of security exploits on network-enabled embedded devices, this technique has come to the attention of numerous hacking communities. BrickerBot, a piece of malware that targeted IoT devices, used PDoS attacks to disable its targets. PhlashDance is a tool created by Rich Smith (an employee of Hewlett-Packard's Systems Security Lab) used to detect and demonstrate PDoS vulnerabilities at the 2008 EUSecWest Applied Security Conference in London, UK.