


==== RC4 attacks ====

Despite the existence of attacks on RC4 that broke its security, cipher suites in SSL and TLS that were based on RC4 were still considered secure prior to 2013 based on the way in which they were used in SSL and TLS. In 2011, the RC4 suite was actually recommended as a workaround for the BEAST attack. New forms of attack disclosed in March 2013 conclusively demonstrated the feasibility of breaking RC4 in TLS, suggesting it was not a good workaround for BEAST. An attack scenario was proposed by AlFardan, Bernstein, Paterson, Poettering and Schuldt that used newly discovered statistical biases in the RC4 key table to recover parts of the plaintext with a large number of TLS encryptions. An attack on RC4 in TLS and SSL that requires 13 × 220 encryptions to break RC4 was unveiled on 8 July 2013 and later described as "feasible" in the accompanying presentation at a USENIX Security Symposium in August 2013. In July 2015, subsequent improvements in the attack make it increasingly practical to defeat the security of RC4-encrypted TLS.
As many modern browsers have been designed to defeat BEAST attacks (except Safari for Mac OS X 10.7 or earlier, for iOS 6 or earlier, and for Windows; see § Web browsers), RC4 is no longer a good choice for TLS 1.0. The CBC ciphers which were affected by the BEAST attack in the past have become a more popular choice for protection. Mozilla and Microsoft recommend disabling RC4 where possible. In February 2015, the use of RC4 cipher suites was officially prohibited in all versions of TLS.
On September 1, 2015, Microsoft, Google, and Mozilla announced that RC4 cipher suites would be disabled by default in their browsers (Microsoft Edge [Legacy], Internet Explorer 11 on Windows 7/8.1/10, Firefox, and Chrome) in early 2016.


==== Truncation attack ====
A TLS (logout) truncation attack blocks a victim's account logout requests so that the user unknowingly remains logged into a web service. When the request to sign out is sent, the attacker injects an unencrypted TCP FIN message (no more data from sender) to close the connection. The server therefore does not receive the logout request and is unaware of the abnormal termination.
Published in July 2013, the attack causes web services such as Gmail and Hotmail to display a page that informs the user that they have successfully signed-out, while ensuring that the user's browser maintains authorization with the service, allowing an attacker with subsequent access to the browser to access and take over control of the user's logged-in account. The attack does not rely on installing malware on the victim's computer; attackers need only place themselves between the victim and the web server (e.g., by setting up a rogue wireless hotspot). This vulnerability also requires access to the victim's computer.
Another possibility is when using FTP the data connection can have a false FIN in the data stream, and if the protocol rules for exchanging close_notify alerts is not adhered to a file can be truncated.


==== Plaintext attack against DTLS ====
In February 2013 two researchers from Royal Holloway, University of London discovered a timing attack which allowed them to recover (parts of the) plaintext from a DTLS connection using the OpenSSL or GnuTLS implementation of DTLS when Cipher Block Chaining mode encryption was used.


==== Unholy PAC attack ====
This attack, discovered in mid-2016, exploits weaknesses in the Web Proxy Autodiscovery Protocol (WPAD) to expose the URL that a web user is attempting to reach via a TLS-enabled web link. Disclosure of a URL can violate a user's privacy, not only because of the website accessed, but also because URLs are sometimes used to authenticate users. Document sharing services, such as those offered by Google and Dropbox, also work by sending a user a security token that is included in the URL. An attacker who obtains such URLs may be able to gain full access to a victim's account or data.
The exploit works against almost all browsers and operating systems.


==== Sweet32 attack ====
The Sweet32 attack breaks all 64-bit block ciphers used in CBC mode as used in TLS by exploiting a birthday attack and either a man-in-the-middle attack or injection of a malicious JavaScript into a web page. The purpose of the man-in-the-middle attack or the JavaScript injection is to allow the attacker to capture enough traffic to mount a birthday attack.


==== Implementation errors: Heartbleed bug, BERserk attack, Cloudflare bug ====

The Heartbleed bug is a serious vulnerability specific to the implementation of SSL/TLS in the popular OpenSSL cryptographic software library, affecting versions 1.0.1 to 1.0.1f. This weakness, reported in April 2014, allows attackers to extract private keys from servers that should normally be protected. The Heartbleed bug allows anyone on the Internet to read the memory of the systems protected by the vulnerable versions of the OpenSSL software. This compromises the secret private keys associated with the public certificates used to identify the service providers and to encrypt the traffic, the names and passwords of the users and the actual content. This allows attackers to eavesdrop on communications, extract data directly from the services and users and to impersonate services and users. The vulnerability is caused by a buffer over-read bug in the OpenSSL software, rather than a defect in the SSL or TLS protocol specification.
In September 2014, a variant of Daniel Bleichenbacher's PKCS#1 v1.5 RSA Signature Forgery vulnerability was announced by Intel Security Advanced Threat Research. This attack, dubbed BERserk, is a result of incomplete ASN.1 length decoding of public key signatures in some SSL implementations, and allows a man-in-the-middle attack by forging a public key signature.
In February 2015, after media reported the hidden pre-installation of superfish adware on some Lenovo notebooks, a researcher found a trusted root certificate on affected Lenovo machines to be insecure, as the keys could easily be accessed using the company name, Komodia, as a passphrase. The Komodia library was designed to intercept client-side TLS/SSL traffic for parental control and surveillance, but it was also used in numerous adware programs, including Superfish, that were often surreptitiously installed unbeknownst to the computer user. In turn, these potentially unwanted programs installed the corrupt root certificate, allowing attackers to completely control web traffic and confirm false websites as authentic.
In May 2016, it was reported that dozens of Danish HTTPS-protected websites belonging to Visa Inc. were vulnerable to attacks allowing hackers to inject malicious code and forged content into the browsers of visitors. The attacks worked because the TLS implementation used on the affected servers incorrectly reused random numbers (nonces) that are intended to be used only once, ensuring that each TLS handshake is unique.
In February 2017, an implementation error caused by a single mistyped character in code used to parse HTML created a buffer overflow error on Cloudflare servers. Similar in its effects to the Heartbleed bug discovered in 2014, this overflow error, widely known as Cloudbleed, allowed unauthorized third parties to read data in the memory of programs running on the servers—data that should otherwise have been protected by TLS.


==== Survey of websites vulnerable to attacks ====
As of June 2025, the Trustworthy Internet Movement estimated the ratio of websites that are vulnerable to TLS attacks.


=== Forward secrecy ===

Forward secrecy is a property of cryptographic systems which ensures that a session key derived from a set of public and private keys will not be compromised if one of the private keys is compromised in the future. Without forward secrecy, if the server's private key is compromised, not only will all future TLS-encrypted sessions using that server certificate be compromised, but also any past sessions that used it as well (provided that these past sessions were intercepted and stored at the time of transmission). An implementation of TLS can provide forward secrecy by requiring the use of ephemeral Diffie–Hellman key exchange to establish session keys, and some notable TLS implementations do so exclusively: e.g., Gmail and other Google HTTPS services that use OpenSSL. However, many clients and servers supporting TLS (including browsers and web servers) are not configured to implement such restrictions. In practice, unless a web service uses Diffie–Hellman key exchange to implement forward secrecy, all of the encrypted web traffic to and from that service can be decrypted by a third party if it obtains the server's master (private) key; e.g., by means of a court order.
Even where Diffie–Hellman key exchange is implemented, server-side session management mechanisms can impact forward secrecy. The use of TLS session tickets (a TLS extension) causes the session to be protected by AES128-CBC-SHA256 regardless of any other negotiated TLS parameters, including forward secrecy ciphersuites, and the long-lived TLS session ticket keys defeat the attempt to implement forward secrecy. Stanford University research in 2014 also found that of 473,802 TLS servers surveyed, 82.9% of the servers deploying ephemeral Diffie–Hellman (DHE) key exchange to support forward secrecy were using weak Diffie–Hellman parameters. These weak parameter choices could potentially compromise the effectiveness of the forward secrecy that the servers sought to provide.
Since late 2011, Google has provided forward secrecy with TLS by default to users of its Gmail service, along with Google Docs and encrypted search, among other services.
Since November 2013, Twitter has provided forward secrecy with TLS to users of its service. As of August 2019, about 80% of TLS-enabled websites are configured to use cipher suites that provide forward secrecy to most web browsers.


=== TLS interception ===

TLS interception (or HTTPS interception if applied particularly to that protocol) is the practice of intercepting an encrypted data stream in order to decrypt it, read and possibly manipulate it, and then re-encrypt it and send the data on its way again. This is done by way of a "transparent proxy": the interception software terminates the incoming TLS connection, inspects the HTTP plaintext, and then creates a new TLS connection to the destination.
TLS/HTTPS interception is used as an information security measure by network operators in order to be able to scan for and protect against the intrusion of malicious content into the network, such as computer viruses and other malware. Such content could otherwise not be detected as long as it is protected by encryption, which is increasingly the case as a result of the routine use of HTTPS and other secure protocols.
A significant drawback of TLS/HTTPS interception is that it introduces new security risks of its own. One notable limitation is that it provides a point where network traffic is available unencrypted thus giving attackers an incentive to attack this point in particular in order to gain access to otherwise secure content. The interception also allows the network operator, or persons who gain access to its interception system, to perform man-in-the-middle attacks against network users. A 2017 study found that "HTTPS interception has become startlingly widespread, and that interception products as a class have a dramatically negative impact on connection security".


== Protocol details ==
The TLS protocol exchanges records, which encapsulate the data to be exchanged in a specific format (see below). Each record can be compressed, padded, appended with a message authentication code (MAC), or encrypted, all depending on the state of the connection. Each record has a content type field that designates the type of data encapsulated, a length field and a TLS version field. The data encapsulated may be control or procedural messages of the TLS itself, or simply the application data needed to be transferred by TLS. The specifications (cipher suite, keys etc.) required to exchange application data by TLS, are agreed upon in the "TLS handshake" between the client requesting the data and the server responding to requests. The protocol therefore defines both the structure of payloads transferred in TLS and the procedure to establish and monitor the transfer.


=== TLS handshake ===

When the connection starts, the record encapsulates a "control" protocol – the handshake messaging protocol (content type 22). This protocol is used to exchange all the information required by both sides for the exchange of the actual application data by TLS. It defines the format of messages and the order of their exchange. These may vary according to the demands of the client and server – i.e., there are several possible procedures to set up the connection. This initial exchange results in a successful TLS connection (both parties ready to transfer application data with TLS) or an alert message (as specified below).


==== Basic TLS handshake ====
A typical connection example follows, illustrating a handshake where the server (but not the client) is authenticated by its certificate:

Negotiation phase:
A client sends a ClientHello message specifying the highest TLS protocol version it supports, a random number, a list of suggested cipher suites and suggested compression methods. If the client is attempting to perform a resumed handshake, it may send a session ID. If the client can use Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation, it may include a list of supported application protocols, such as HTTP/2.
The server responds with a ServerHello message, containing the chosen protocol version, a random number, cipher suite and compression method from the choices offered by the client. To confirm or allow resumed handshakes the server may send a session ID. The chosen protocol version should be the highest that both the client and server support. For example, if the client supports TLS version 1.1 and the server supports version 1.2, version 1.1 should be selected; version 1.2 should not be selected.
The server sends its Certificate message (depending on the selected cipher suite, this may be omitted by the server).
The server sends its ServerKeyExchange message (depending on the selected cipher suite, this may be omitted by the server). This message is sent for all DHE, ECDHE and DH_anon cipher suites.
The server sends a ServerHelloDone message, indicating it is done with handshake negotiation.
The client responds with a ClientKeyExchange message, which may contain a PreMasterSecret, public key, or nothing. (Again, this depends on the selected cipher.) This PreMasterSecret is encrypted using the public key of the server certificate.
The client and server then use the random numbers and PreMasterSecret to compute a common secret, called the "master secret". All other key data (session keys such as IV, symmetric encryption key, MAC key) for this connection is derived from this master secret (and the client- and server-generated random values), which is passed through a carefully designed pseudorandom function.
The client now sends a ChangeCipherSpec record, essentially telling the server, "Everything I tell you from now on will be authenticated (and encrypted if encryption parameters were present in the server certificate)." The ChangeCipherSpec is itself a record-level protocol with content type of 20.
The client sends an authenticated and encrypted Finished message, containing a hash and MAC over the previous handshake messages.
The server will attempt to decrypt the client's Finished message and verify the hash and MAC. If the decryption or verification fails, the handshake is considered to have failed and the connection should be terminated.
Finally, the server sends a ChangeCipherSpec, telling the client, "Everything I tell you from now on will be authenticated (and encrypted, if encryption was negotiated)."
The server sends its authenticated and encrypted Finished message.
The client performs the same decryption and verification procedure as the server did in the previous step.
Application phase: at this point, the "handshake" is complete and the application protocol is enabled, with content type of 23. Application messages exchanged between client and server will also be authenticated and optionally encrypted exactly like in their Finished message. Otherwise, the content type will return 25 and the client will not authenticate.


==== Client-authenticated TLS handshake ====
The following full example shows a client being authenticated (in addition to the server as in the example above; see mutual authentication) via TLS using certificates exchanged between both peers.

Negotiation Phase:
A client sends a ClientHello message specifying the highest TLS protocol version it supports, a random number, a list of suggested cipher suites and compression methods.
The server responds with a ServerHello message, containing the chosen protocol version, a random number, cipher suite and compression method from the choices offered by the client. The server may also send a session id as part of the message to perform a resumed handshake.
The server sends its Certificate message (depending on the selected cipher suite, this may be omitted by the server).
The server sends its ServerKeyExchange message (depending on the selected cipher suite, this may be omitted by the server). This message is sent for all DHE, ECDHE and DH_anon ciphersuites.[1]
The server sends a CertificateRequest message, to request a certificate from the client.
The server sends a ServerHelloDone message, indicating it is done with handshake negotiation.
The client responds with a Certificate message, which contains the client's certificate, but not its private key.
The client sends a ClientKeyExchange message, which may contain a PreMasterSecret, public key, or nothing. (Again, this depends on the selected cipher.) This PreMasterSecret is encrypted using the public key of the server certificate.
The client sends a CertificateVerify message, which is a signature over the previous handshake messages using the client's certificate's private key. This signature can be verified by using the client's certificate's public key. This lets the server know that the client has access to the private key of the certificate and thus owns the certificate.
The client and server then use the random numbers and PreMasterSecret to compute a common secret, called the "master secret". All other key data ("session keys") for this connection is derived from this master secret (and the client- and server-generated random values), which is passed through a carefully designed pseudorandom function.
The client now sends a ChangeCipherSpec record, essentially telling the server, "Everything I tell you from now on will be authenticated (and encrypted if encryption was negotiated). "The ChangeCipherSpec is itself a record-level protocol and has type 20 and not 22.
Finally, the client sends an encrypted Finished message, containing a hash and MAC over the previous handshake messages.
The server will attempt to decrypt the client's Finished message and verify the hash and MAC. If the decryption or verification fails, the handshake is considered to have failed and the connection should be torn down.
Finally, the server sends a ChangeCipherSpec, telling the client, "Everything I tell you from now on will be authenticated (and encrypted if encryption was negotiated)."
The server sends its own encrypted Finished message.
The client performs the same decryption and verification procedure as the server did in the previous step.
Application phase: at this point, the "handshake" is complete and the application protocol is enabled, with content type of 23. Application messages exchanged between client and server will also be encrypted exactly like in their Finished message.


==== Resumed TLS handshake ====
Public key operations (e.g., RSA) are relatively expensive in terms of computational power. TLS provides a secure shortcut in the handshake mechanism to avoid these operations: resumed sessions. Resumed sessions are implemented using session IDs or session tickets.
Apart from the performance benefit, resumed sessions can also be used for single sign-on, as it guarantees that both the original session and any resumed session originate from the same client. This is of particular importance for the FTP over TLS/SSL protocol, which would otherwise suffer from a man-in-the-middle attack in which an attacker could intercept the contents of the secondary data connections.


==== TLS 1.3 handshake ====
The TLS 1.3 handshake was condensed to only one round trip compared to the two round trips required in previous versions of TLS/SSL.
To start the handshake, the client guesses which key exchange algorithm will be selected by the server and sends a ClientHello message to the server containing a list of supported ciphers (in order of the client's preference) and public keys for some or all of its key exchange guesses. If the client successfully guesses the key exchange algorithm, 1 round trip is eliminated from the handshake. After receiving the ClientHello, the server selects a cipher and sends back a ServerHello with its own public key, followed by server Certificate and Finished messages.
After the client receives the server's finished message, it now is coordinated with the server on which cipher suite to use.


===== Session IDs =====
In an ordinary full handshake, the server sends a session id as part of the ServerHello message. The client associates this session id with the server's IP address and TCP port, so that when the client connects again to that server, it can use the session id to shortcut the handshake. In the server, the session id maps to the cryptographic parameters previously negotiated, specifically the "master secret". Both sides must have the same "master secret" or the resumed handshake will fail (this prevents an eavesdropper from using a session id). The random data in the ClientHello and ServerHello messages virtually guarantee that the generated connection keys will be different from in the previous connection. In the RFCs, this type of handshake is called an abbreviated handshake. It is also described in the literature as a restart handshake.

Negotiation phase:
A client sends a ClientHello message specifying the highest TLS protocol version it supports, a random number, a list of suggested cipher suites and compression methods. Included in the message is the session id from the previous TLS connection.
The server responds with a ServerHello message, containing the chosen protocol version, a random number, cipher suite and compression method from the choices offered by the client. If the server recognizes the session id sent by the client, it responds with the same session id. The client uses this to recognize that a resumed handshake is being performed. If the server does not recognize the session id sent by the client, it sends a different value for its session id. This tells the client that a resumed handshake will not be performed. At this point, both the client and server have the "master secret" and random data to generate the key data to be used for this connection.
The server now sends a ChangeCipherSpec record, essentially telling the client, "Everything I tell you from now on will be encrypted." The ChangeCipherSpec is itself a record-level protocol and has type 20 and not 22.
Finally, the server sends an encrypted Finished message, containing a hash and MAC over the previous handshake messages.
The client will attempt to decrypt the server's Finished message and verify the hash and MAC. If the decryption or verification fails, the handshake is considered to have failed and the connection should be torn down.
Finally, the client sends a ChangeCipherSpec, telling the server, "Everything I tell you from now on will be encrypted."
The client sends its own encrypted Finished message.
The server performs the same decryption and verification procedure as the client did in the previous step.
Application phase: at this point, the "handshake" is complete and the application protocol is enabled, with content type of 23. Application messages exchanged between client and server will also be encrypted exactly like in their Finished message.


===== Session tickets =====
Instead of session IDs, TLS can also be extended via use of session tickets. It defines a way to resume a TLS session without requiring that session-specific state is stored at the TLS server.
When using session tickets, the TLS server stores its session-specific state in a session ticket and sends the session ticket to the TLS client for storing. The client resumes a TLS session by sending the session ticket to the server, and the server resumes the TLS session according to the session-specific state in the ticket. The session ticket is encrypted and authenticated by the server, and the server verifies its validity before using its contents.
One particular weakness of this method with OpenSSL is that it always limits encryption and authentication security of the transmitted TLS session ticket to AES128-CBC-SHA256, no matter what other TLS parameters were negotiated for the actual TLS session. This means that the state information (the TLS session ticket) is not as well protected as the TLS session itself. Of particular concern is OpenSSL's storage of the keys in an application-wide context (SSL_CTX), i.e. for the life of the application, and not allowing for re-keying of the AES128-CBC-SHA256 TLS session tickets without resetting the application-wide OpenSSL context (which is uncommon, error-prone and often requires manual administrative intervention).


=== TLS record ===
This is the general format of all TLS records.

Content Type: 8 bits
This field identifies the Record Layer Protocol Type contained in this record.

Legacy version: 16 bits
This field identifies the major and minor version of TLS prior to TLS 1.3 for the contained message. For a ClientHello message, this need not be the highest version supported by the client. For TLS 1.3 and later, this must be set to 0x0303 and application must send supported versions in an extra message extension block.

Length: 16 bits; Length < 214
The length of Protocol message(s), MAC and Padding fields combined. The length should not exceed 214 bytes (16 KiB).
Protocol message(s): variable
One or more messages identified by the Protocol field. Note that this field may be encrypted depending on the state of the connection. The length (in bytes) of all messages is indicated by the letter m.
Message Authentication Code (MAC): 16, 20, or 32 bytes (optional)
A message authentication code computed over the Protocol message(s) field, with additional key material included. 32 bytes for the SHA-256-based HMAC, 20 bytes for the SHA-1-based HMAC, 16 bytes for the MD5-based HMAC. Note that this field may be encrypted, or not included entirely, depending on the state of the connection. The length (in bytes) of the MAC is indicated by the letter q.
Padding: variable (optional)
Padding is only added when needed.
No MAC or Padding fields can be present at end of TLS records before all cipher algorithms and parameters have been negotiated and handshaked and then confirmed by sending a CipherStateChange record (see below) for signalling that these parameters will take effect in all further records sent by the same peer.


==== Handshake protocol ====
Most messages exchanged during the setup of the TLS session are based on this record, unless an error or warning occurs and needs to be signaled by an Alert protocol record (see below), or the encryption mode of the session is modified by another record (see ChangeCipherSpec protocol below).

Content Type: 8 bits; == 22
This field indicates the Handshake Protocol Type.
Message Type: 8 bits
This field identifies the handshake message type.

Handshake Message Data Length: 24 bits
This is a 3-byte field indicating the length of the handshake data, not including the header.
Handshake Message: variable
Data of the handshake message itself.
Note that multiple handshake messages may be combined within one record.


==== Alert protocol ====
This record should normally not be sent during normal handshaking or application exchanges. However, this message can be sent at any time during the handshake and up to the closure of the session. If this is used to signal a fatal error, the session will be closed immediately after sending this record, so this record is used to give a reason for this closure. If the alert level is flagged as a warning, the remote can decide to close the session if it decides that the session is not reliable enough for its needs (before doing so, the remote may also send its own signal).

Content Type: 8 bits; == 21
This field indicates the Alert Protocol Type.
Length: 16 bits; == 2
The length of the rest of fields, which is 2.
Level: 8 bits
This field identifies the level of alert. If the level is fatal, the sender should close the session immediately. Otherwise, the recipient may decide to terminate the session itself, by sending its own fatal alert and closing the session itself immediately after sending it. The use of Alert records is optional, however if it is missing before the session closure, the session may be resumed automatically (with its handshakes).
Normal closure of a session after termination of the transported application should preferably be alerted with at least the Close notify Alert type (with a simple warning level) to prevent such automatic resume of a new session. Signalling explicitly the normal closure of a secure session before effectively closing its transport layer is useful to prevent or detect attacks (like attempts to truncate the securely transported data, if it intrinsically does not have a predetermined length or duration that the recipient of the secured data may expect).

Description: 8 bits
This field identifies which type of alert is being sent.


==== ChangeCipherSpec protocol ====

Content Type: 8 bits; == 20
This field indicates the ChangeCipherSpec Protocol Type.
Length: 16 bits; == 1
The length of the rest of fields, which is 1.
CCS Protocol Type: 8 bits
This field identifies the CCS Protocol type. There is currently only one.


==== Application protocol ====

Content Type: 8 bits; == 23
This field identifies the Application Protocol Type.
Length: 16 bits; Length < 214
The length of Application Data, MAC and Padding fields combined. The length should not exceed 214 bytes (16 KiB).
Application Data: variable
Data of the application. The length (in bytes) of the data is indicated by the letter m.
Message Authentication Code (MAC): 16, 20, or 32 bytes (optional)
A message authentication code computed over the Application Data field. 32 bytes for the SHA-256-based HMAC, 20 bytes for the SHA-1-based HMAC, 16 bytes for the MD5-based HMAC. The length (in bytes) of the MAC is indicated by the letter q.
Padding: variable (optional)
The last byte contains the padding length.


== Support for name-based virtual servers ==
From the application protocol point of view, TLS belongs to a lower layer, although the TCP/IP model is too coarse to show it. This means that the TLS handshake is usually (except in the STARTTLS case) performed before the application protocol can start. In the name-based virtual server feature being provided by the application layer, all co-hosted virtual servers share the same certificate because the server has to select and send a certificate immediately after the ClientHello message. This is a big problem in hosting environments because it means either sharing the same certificate among all customers or using a different IP address for each of them.
There are two known workarounds provided by X.509:

If all virtual servers belong to the same domain, a wildcard certificate can be used. Besides the loose host name selection that might be a problem or not, there is no common agreement about how to match wildcard certificates. Different rules are applied depending on the application protocol or software used.
Add every virtual host name in the subjectAltName extension. The major problem being that the certificate needs to be reissued whenever a new virtual server is added.
To provide the server name, Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions allow clients to include a Server Name Indication extension (SNI) in the extended ClientHello message. This extension hints to the server immediately which name the client wishes to connect to, so the server can select the appropriate certificate to send to the clients.
There is also a method to implement name-based virtual hosting by upgrading HTTP to TLS via an HTTP/1.1 Upgrade header. Normally this is to securely implement HTTP over TLS within the main "http" URI scheme instead of the commonly used "https" scheme. This would avoid forking the URI space and reduces the number of used ports, however, few implementations currently support this.


== See also ==
Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation – a TLS extension used for SPDY and TLS False Start
Bullrun (decryption program) – a secret anti-encryption program run by the U.S. National Security Agency
Certificate authority
Certificate Transparency
Datagram TLS (DTLS)
Delegated credential
HTTP Strict Transport Security – HSTS
Key ring file
Private Communications Technology (PCT) – a historic Microsoft competitor to SSL 2.0
QUIC (Quick UDP Internet Connections) – "…was designed to provide security protection equivalent to TLS/SSL"; QUIC's main goal is to improve perceived performance of connection-oriented web applications that are currently using TCP
Server-Gated Cryptography
tcpcrypt
Datagram Transport Layer Security
TLS acceleration


== Further reading ==

Wagner, David; Schneier, Bruce (November 1996). "Analysis of the SSL 3.0 Protocol" (PDF). The Second USENIX Workshop on Electronic Commerce Proceedings. USENIX Press. pp. 29–40. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2006-10-16. Retrieved 2006-10-12.
Rescorla, Eric (2001). SSL and TLS: Designing and Building Secure Systems. United States: Addison-Wesley Pub Co. ISBN 978-0-201-61598-2.
Stephen A. Thomas (2000). SSL and TLS essentials securing the Web. New York: Wiley. ISBN 978-0-471-38354-3.
Bard, Gregory (2006). "A Challenging But Feasible Blockwise-Adaptive Chosen-Plaintext Attack on SSL". International Association for Cryptologic Research (136). Archived from the original on 2011-09-23. Retrieved 2011-09-23.
Canvel, Brice. "Password Interception in a SSL/TLS Channel". Archived from the original on 2016-04-20. Retrieved 2007-04-20.
Creating VPNs with IPsec and SSL/TLS Archived 2015-04-12 at the Wayback Machine Linux Journal article by Rami Rosen
Joshua Davies (2010). Implementing SSL/TLS. Wiley. ISBN 978-0-470-92041-1.
Polk, Tim; McKay, Kerry; Chokhani, Santosh (April 2014). "Guidelines for the Selection, Configuration, and Use of Transport Layer Security (TLS) Implementations" (PDF). National Institute of Standards and Technology. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-05-08. Retrieved 2014-05-07.
Abdou, AbdelRahman; van Oorschot, Paul (August 2017). "Server Location Verification (SLV) and Server Location Pinning: Augmenting TLS Authentication". ACM Transactions on Privacy and Security. 21 (1): 1:1–1:26. doi:10.1145/3139294. S2CID 5869541. Archived from the original on 2019-03-22. Retrieved 2018-01-11.
Ivan Ristic (2022). Bulletproof TLS and PKI, Second Edition. Feisty Duck. ISBN 978-1-907117-09-1.


== External links ==
Internet Engineering Task Force – TLS Workgroup Archived 2014-01-11 at the Wayback Machine


== IETF Request for comments ==


=== Primary standards ===
The current approved version of (D)TLS is version 1.3, which is specified in:

RFC 8446 – "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3," Proposed Standard.
RFC 9147 – "The Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) Protocol Version 1.3," Proposed Standard.
The current standards replaces these former versions:

RFC 5246 – "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2," Obsolete.
RFC 6347 – "Datagram Transport Layer Security Version 1.2," Obsolete.
RFC 4346 – "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.1," Historic.
RFC 2246 – "The TLS Protocol Version 1.0," Historic.
RFC 6101 – "The Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) Protocol Version 3.0," Historic.
Internet Draft (1995): "The SSL Protocol"


=== Extensions ===
Other RFCs subsequently extended (D)TLS.
Extensions to (D)TLS 1.3 include:

RFC 9367 – "GOST Cipher Suites for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3," Informational.
Extensions to (D)TLS 1.2 include:

RFC 5288 – "AES Galois Counter Mode (GCM) Cipher Suites for TLS," Proposed Standard.
RFC 5289 – "TLS Elliptic Curve Cipher Suites with SHA-256/384 and AES Galois Counter Mode (GCM)," Proposed Standard.
RFC 5746 – "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Renegotiation Indication Extension," Proposed Standard.
RFC 5878 – "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Authorization Extensions," Experimental.
RFC 5932 – "Camellia Cipher Suites for TLS," Proposed Standard.
RFC 6066 – "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions: Extension Definitions," Proposed Standard. 
RFC 6091 – "Using OpenPGP Keys for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Authentication," Informational.
RFC 6176 – "Prohibiting Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) Version 2.0," Proposed Standard.
RFC 6209 – "Addition of the ARIA Cipher Suites to Transport Layer Security (TLS)," Informational.
RFC 6347 – "Datagram Transport Layer Security Version 1.2," Obsolete. 
RFC 6367 – "Addition of the Camellia Cipher Suites to Transport Layer Security (TLS)," Informational.
RFC 6460 – "Suite B Profile for Transport Layer Security (TLS)," Historic. 
RFC 6655 – "AES-CCM Cipher Suites for Transport Layer Security (TLS)," Proposed Standard.
RFC 7027 – "Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) Brainpool Curves for Transport Layer Security (TLS)," Informational.
RFC 7251 – "AES-CCM Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) Cipher Suites for TLS," Informational.
RFC 7301 – "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation Extension," Proposed Standard.
RFC 7366 – "Encrypt-then-MAC for Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS)," Proposed Standard.
RFC 7465 – "Prohibiting RC4 Cipher Suites," Proposed Standard.
RFC 7507 – "TLS Fallback Signaling Cipher Suite Value (SCSV) for Preventing Protocol Downgrade Attacks," Obsolete.
RFC 7568 – "Deprecating Secure Sockets Layer Version 3.0," Proposed Standard.
RFC 7627 – "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Session Hash and Extended Master Secret Extension," Proposed Standard.
RFC 7685 – "A Transport Layer Security (TLS) ClientHello Padding Extension," Proposed Standard.
RFC 8422 – "Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) Cipher Suites for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Versions 1.2 and Earlier," Proposed Standard.
RFC 9189 – "GOST Cipher Suites for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2," Informational.
Extensions to (D)TLS 1.1 include:

RFC 4366 – "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions," Obsolete. 
RFC 4492 – "Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) Cipher Suites for Transport Layer Security (TLS)," Obsolete.
RFC 4680 – "TLS Handshake Message for Supplemental Data," Proposed Standard.
RFC 4681 – "TLS User Mapping Extension," Proposed Standard.
RFC 4785 – "Pre-Shared Key (PSK) Ciphersuites with NULL Encryption for Transport Layer Security (TLS)," Proposed Standard.
RFC 5054 – "Using the Secure Remote Password (SRP) Protocol for TLS Authentication," Informational. 
RFC 5077 – "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Session Resumption without Server-Side State," Obsolete.
RFC 5081 – "Using OpenPGP Keys for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Authentication," Experimental.
RFC 5216 – "The EAP-TLS Authentication Protocol," Proposed Standard.
Extensions to TLS 1.0 include:

RFC 2595 – "Using TLS with IMAP, POP3 and ACAP," Proposed Standard. 
RFC 2712 – "Addition of Kerberos Cipher Suites to Transport Layer Security (TLS)," Proposed Standard. 
RFC 2817 – "Upgrading to TLS Within HTTP/1.1," Proposed Standard. 
RFC 2818 – "HTTP Over TLS," Obsolete. 
RFC 3207 – "SMTP Service Extension for Secure SMTP over Transport Layer Security," Proposed Standard. 
RFC 3268 – "Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) Ciphersuites for Transport Layer Security (TLS)," Obsolete. 
RFC 3546 – "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions," Obsolete. 
RFC 3749 – "Transport Layer Security Protocol Compression Methods," Proposed Standard. 
RFC 3943 – "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Compression Using Lempel-Ziv-Stac (LZS)," Informational.
RFC 4132 – "Addition of Camellia Cipher Suites to Transport Layer Security (TLS)," Obsolete.
RFC 4162 – "Addition of SEED Cipher Suites to Transport Layer Security (TLS)," Proposed Standard.
RFC 4217 – "Securing FTP with TLS," Proposed Standard.
RFC 4279 – "Pre-Shared Key Ciphersuites for Transport Layer Security (TLS)," Proposed Standard. 


=== Informational RFCs ===
RFC 7457 – "Summarizing Known Attacks on Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram TLS (DTLS)," Informational.
RFC 9325 – "Recommendations for Secure Use of Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS)," Best Current Practice 195.


== References ==
